      Platzhalter für Bild, Bild auf Titelfolie hinter das Logo einsetzen




Data Driven Decision Making
Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in Approximate Dynamic Programming
       Data Analytics Issues for ADP Methods


         Exogenous Information




            Feature Engineering




        Endogenous Information



                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 2


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
         Unsupervised vs. Supervised Learning
     ▪ Machine Learning differentiates concepts in (un-)supervised learning approaches

     ▪ Unsupervised learning looks at data objects consisting of attributes only
     ▪ It then builds a model that describes all data objects in the best possible way
     ▪ It stands proxy for descriptive modeling, an illustrative concept is clustering

     ▪      Supervised learning looks at data objects consisting of attributes and (one) variable
     ▪      It aims at a mapping of attribute values to one distinct value of the variable
     ▪      It learns a suitable mapping from training data, later on it discriminates test data
     ▪      It stands proxy for predictive modeling, an illustrative concept is classification

     ▪ Attribute/variable types determine e.g. regression (numerical) vs. classification (categorial)

                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 3


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Data Objects
       We often assume that the data set is provided in form of a simple table

                                 unsupervised learning                                                              supervised learning
                               𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑒 1            …         𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑒 𝑚                                   𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑒 1     …       𝑉𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒    phase
         𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 1              𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒11         𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒1…           𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒1𝑚                𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 1            𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒11     𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒1…    𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒1    training
                …               𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒…1          𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒……          𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒…𝑚                       …              𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒…1      𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒……   𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒…     training
         𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑛              𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑛1         𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑛…           𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑛𝑚                𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑛            𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑛1     𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑛…   𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑛     test data
                                                 Berthold et al. (2010), Ch. 4.1



       The rows of the table are called instances, records, samples or data objects
       The columns of the table are called attributes, features or variables




                                 Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 4


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Attribute Scales
       ▪ Every attribute has exactly one level of measurement/scale
       ▪ Scale defines the types of operations and computations that are allowed for the attribute values

                                                                                               Mathematical
                                          Scale              Measure property                                               Example
                                                                                                operators
                                                               Classification,
                                         Nominal                                                      =, ≠       Color: red, green, blue, orange
                                                               membership
                 Categorical                                                                                               Likert Scale:
                                         Ordinal            Comparison, level                         >, <    Like, Like Somewhat, Neutral, Dislike
                                                                                                                        Somewhat, Dislike
                                                                                                                         Date & Time:
                                         Interval           Difference, affinity                      +, −
                 Numerical /                                                                                          05:00, 08:00, 11:00
                  Cardinal                                                                                                  Salary:
                                           Ratio           Magnitude, amount                          ×, ÷
                                                                                                                  25.000€, 50.000€, 150.000€
                                                                                                                            Berthold et al. (2010), Ch. 4.1




                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 5


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Exogenous Information


         Exogenous Information




                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 6


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Exogeneous Information
       ▪      Little information suggests the use of policy function approx. or cost function approx.

       ▪      Anticipation may be achieved by explorative data analysis → derive future costs

       ▪      The more you know about exogeneous information, the more useful anticipation becomes

       ▪      Detailed exogeneous information suggests look-ahead methods or value function approx.

       ▪      Stochastic transitions denoted in the MDP are to be implemented in the simulation

       ▪      Transitions may be derived from distributions or they may be sampled from observations

       ▪      In the following, there are examples provided for both approaches


                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 7


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Generating stochastic transition from distribution
       ▪ Consider a stochastic transition depicting the
         elapse of time before the next customer                                                                                                    Θ
                                                                                                                                                    Θ
         arrives                                                                                                                                    Θ




       ▪ Inter-arrival times (between customers) are
         often depicted by an exponential distribution

       ▪ Consider random variable
         with 𝜃 being the scale parameter

       ▪ Cumulative distribution function
                                                                                                                                                    Θ
                                                                                                                                                    Θ
                                                                                                                                                    Θ




                                                                                                            https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exponential_distribution

                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 8


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Generating stochastic transition for distribution




                                                                                                            https://medium.com/@m.pierini/generation-of-a-random-variable-with-the-inversion-method-4ea99e12569a
         ▪ Apply inversion method if random variable comes
           with an invertible cumulative form 𝐹 −1

         ▪ Inversion of 𝐹 𝑥 for exponential distribution




         ▪ Generate random variable

         ▪ A sample from uniform distribution 𝑈 0,1 is transposed into an exponentially dist. sample

                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 9


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Generating stochastic transition from observations
       ▪      A logistics problem is considered, which is to be solved with the help of sequential
              decision making. The problem extends over many decision points at which new
              commodities appear

       ▪      Commodities are to be delivered to their destination on time in a complex network.

       ▪      For this purpose, a simulation introduces commodities over time. A commodity has a
              start location, a destination, a delivery time and a weight.

       ▪      All these features cannot simply be drawn from distributions.

       ▪      Since there is access to historic logistics data, new data can be generated for our
              problem by drawing samples from the historic pool of commodities at random




                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 10


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Choosing the number of commodities                                                                    θ = 1
                                                                                                             θ = 5
                                                                                                             θ = 9
         ▪      The first step is to decide how many new commodities will appear
                within each stochastic transition.

         ▪      In the literature, this number is usually determined using a discrete
                Poisson distribution (suggesting # of independent events occurring)
                                                     θ𝑘 −θ
                                           𝑃θ 𝑘 =       𝑒
                                                     𝑘!

         ▪      Parameter θ determines the expected #, 𝑘 denotes realizations.

         ▪      The CDF is built by summing up 𝑛 probabilities 𝐹𝜃 𝑛 = σ𝑛𝑘=0 𝑃𝜃 (𝑘)

                                                                                                             θ = 1
         ▪      Since the CDF is not invertible, draw 𝑥: 𝐹𝜃 𝑥 ≤ 𝑈 0,1 ≤ 𝐹𝜃 (𝑥 + 1)                           θ = 5
                                                                                                             θ = 9



                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 11


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Choosing the commodities
       ▪ The second step is to select the commodities that appear in the respective transitions.

       ▪ As many commodities (as previously specified by the Poisson distribution) are drawn from the
         pool of all available commodities at each decision time.

       ▪ Since the (unknown) underlying distribution are already in the data, the selection can be made
         using a discrete uniform distribution.

       ▪ With this, each commodity 𝑥 has the same probability of being selected from an array of 𝑛
         commodities ranging from 0 to 𝑛 − 1: 𝑥 = ⌊𝑈 0,1 ∗ 𝑛⌋

       ▪ In this way, a data set can be compiled for a sequential decision process.

                                                                                                             https://www.flaticon.com/de/kostenloses-
                                                                                                             icon/paket_7274757




                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 12


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Two issues with generating stochastic transitions
       ▪ Correlation
         ▪ Random variables are not independent but follow some correlation
         ▪ Correlation (due to causation) can appear time and/or space relation
         ▪ For instance, a congestion on a road will cause a congestion on a parallel road
            ▪      Zhaoxia Guo, Stein W. Wallace, Michal Kaut (2019) Vehicle Routing with Space- and Time-Correlated Stochastic
                   Travel Times: Evaluating the Objective Function. INFORMS Journal on Computing 31(4):654-670


       ▪ Outlier
         ▪ A distribution approximated from observations include historic pecularities
         ▪ In terms of a predictive model (what will happen?), overfitting is a topic
         ▪ A predictive model comes with two objectives (accuracy and reduction of variance)
            ▪      See Shmueli, G., & Koppius, O.R. (2011) Predictive Analytics in Information Systems Research. MIS Quarterly, 35(3),
                   553–572


                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 13


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Feature Engineering




            Feature Engineering




                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 14


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Decision Process
       ▪ Stochastic and dynamic decision modelling aims at generating an (near) optimal policy

       ▪ A policy provides a suitable decision to every state of the state space

       ▪ A small state- and decision space helps keeping anticipation computationally tractable

       ▪ Space reduction drives out dimensions from consideration (e.g. spatial or time)

       ▪ Next to problem specific dimension reduction generic analytics techniques can be applied

       ▪ Either important features are selected or the dimensionality of the state space is reduced


                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 15


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Feature selection techniques
       ▪ Unsupervised: do not incorporate variable

       ▪ Supervised: Determine features with strong
         relations to target variable by statistics

                ▪ Intrinsic: For instance decision trees

                ▪ Wrapper: Start with many features and
                  successively eliminate features

                ▪ Filter: Score features in accordance to
                  relationship between feature and variable


                                                                                                 https://machinelearningmastery.com/feature-selection-with-real-and-categorical-data/



                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 16


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Filter based feature selection techniques


       ▪ Choice by
         ▪ Feature type (input)
         ▪ Variable type (output)
         ▪ Normal distribution (ANOVA)
         ▪ Rank based (Kendall)




                                                         https://machinelearningmastery.com/feature-selection-with-real-and-categorical-data/



                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 17


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Taxonomy of methods for dimensionality reduction
                                                                                                             Important properties

                                                                                                                 Parametrization
                                                                                                                 Parametric
                                                                                                                 transformations allow the
                                                                                                                 mapping of further data
                                                                                                                 points into the lower-
                                                                                                                 dimensional space

                                                                                                                 Linearity
                                                                                                                 A linear transformation
                                                                                                                 preserves linear properties
                                                                                                                 of the data in the mapping

                                                                                                                 Convexity
                                                                                                                 Convex objective functions
                                                                                                                 guarantee the finding of
                                                                                                                 the optimal low-
                                                                                                                 dimensional space with
                                                                                                                 respect to the information
                                                                                                                 metric

                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 18


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Possible Candidates for Reduction of Dimensionality

                               Van der Maaten         Method    Description                  Graphik
                               et al. (2009)
                                                                 ▪ Lower-dimensional
                                                                   representation                          Accelerated learning
                                                                   maximizing the variance                 With lowered
                                                       PCA                                                 dimensionality the
                                                                   of the data sample
                                                                                                       +   combinatoric of states
                                                                 ▪ Linear transformation                   decreases which allows
                                                                 ▪ Parametric mapping                      for more visits per state

                                                                                                           Reduced performance
                                                                 ▪ Lower-dimensional                       As dimensionality
                                                                   representation
                                                                   minimizing the minimal              -   reduction is related to
                                                                                                           loss of information the
                                                       Auto-       squared error of the                    performance in
                                Review paper           encode      reconstructed input                     convergence is reduced
                                testing dimension-     r
                                ality reduction me-              ▪ Non-linear
                                thods on artificial                transformation
                                and real datasets                ▪ Parametric mapping



                                                                                        This and following slides: Dissertation of Julius
                                                                                        Heitmann (2023)
                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 19


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Performance on a demand responsive taxi problem




          ▪ PCA and AE learn (and perform) better at start                                                   State representation Relative performance   Accepted requests
                                                                                                             High-dimensional state      104.3%                30.7
                                                                                                             PCA state                   103.1%                28.1
          ▪ In later iterations the high-dim model catches up                                                Autoencoder state           102.0%                31.3
                                                                                                             Aggregated state            101.5%                29.8
                                                                                                             Myopic reference            100.0%                30.6

                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 20


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Endogenous information




        Endogenous Information



                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 21


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Endogenous information
       ▪      Look-ahead approx. and value function approx. generate values from simulation runs
       ▪      Values observed for multiple runs are aggregated into scalar values → data mining task
       ▪      Supervised learning methods depicts relation between features and resulting value
       ▪      Basically, we classify an value (output) upon observed features (inputs)
       ▪      Classification (discrete) and regression (continuous) as well as ANN can be used.

       ▪ Supervised learning methods depend on feature and variable type
         (regression/classification)
       ▪ White-box and black-box approaches can be distinguished (decision tree/ANN)
       ▪ One design issue is the linearity of the underlying model (regression vs. ANN)
       ▪ Methods differ in the number of observations required for learning (decision tree/ANN)


                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 22


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Classification: Example with 2-Dim Input and 2 Classes


                                                                                                    Training samples
                                                                                                     𝑥1 , 𝑦1 , … , 𝑥𝑁 , 𝑦𝑁 ∈ ℝ2 × {0,1}

                                                                                           Coordinate        Class label

                                                                                                    Task
                                                                                                    Derive a hypothesis ℎ that allows us
                                                                                                    to classify unlabeled data points
                                                                                                                    ෝ = 𝒉(𝒙)
                                                                                                                    𝒚




                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 23


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Classification: Linear Regression

                                                                                                    Linear Regression

                                                                                                                     ෝ = 𝜽 + 𝒘𝑻 𝒙
                                                                                                                     𝒚


                                                                                                             Score    Bias      Weight   Input
                                                                                                    Using the score, we predict a class by

                                                                                                    Orange      if           ෝ > 𝟎. 𝟓
                                                                                                                             𝒚
                                                                                                    Red         if           ෝ ≤ 𝟎. 𝟓
                                                                                                                             𝒚




                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 24


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Classification: Lookup-Table of Size 8x8
                                                                                                   Table

                                                                                                                       ෝ = 𝑻(𝑨 𝒙 )
                                                                                                                       𝒚


                                                                                                        Count vector    Table   Aggregation   Input

                                                                                                   A class is then predicted by

                                                                                                   Orange         if            ෞ0 > 𝒚
                                                                                                                                𝒚    ෞ𝟏
                                                                                                   Red            if            ෞ1 ≤ 𝒚
                                                                                                                                𝒚    ෞ𝟎




                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 25


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Classification: Decision Tree with 29 Leaves
              𝐼1           𝐼2                       𝐼3        𝐼4          𝐼5                         Decision Tree

                                                                                                                           𝑲

                                                                                                                      ෝ = ෍ 𝒑𝒌 ∙ 𝕀 𝒙∈𝑰𝒌
                                                                                                                      𝒚
                           𝐼7                       𝐼8       𝐼9           𝐼10                                              𝒌=𝟏
              𝐼6

                                                                                                        Probability        Vector of class   1 if x is in leaf 𝐼𝑘 ,
                                                                                                        vector             probabilities     0 else
              𝐼11         𝐼12                       𝐼13                   𝐼14
              𝐼15         𝐼16                       𝐼17     𝐼18          𝐼19                         A class is then predicted by
              𝐼20         𝐼21                       𝐼22     𝐼23          𝐼24
                                                    𝐼27      𝐼28         𝐼29
                                                                                                     Orange           if           ෞ0 > 𝒚
                                                                                                                                   𝒚    ෞ𝟏
              𝐼25         𝐼26
                                                                                                     Red              if           ෞ1 ≤ 𝒚
                                                                                                                                   𝒚    ෞ𝟎


                                Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 26


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Advanced Methods: Gradient Boosted Decision Trees
       ▪ Reminder                                A decision tree is noted by 𝐹 𝑥; 𝑝, 𝐼 ≔ σ𝐾
                                                                                          𝑘=1 𝑝𝑘 ∙ 𝕀 𝑥∈𝐼𝑘


       ▪ Problem                                 A single decision tree is prone to overfitting

       ▪ Solution                                Fit several small trees and use them as an ensemble

                                                                                                    𝐽
       ▪ Iterative procedure 𝐹𝑚 𝑥 = 𝐹𝑚−1 𝑥 + 𝛼𝑚 σ𝑗=1 𝑝𝑗𝑚 𝕀 𝑥∈𝐼𝑗𝑚


                                                                                       Fit the residual of 𝐹𝑚−1




                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 27


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Advanced Methods: Neural Network
       ▪ Reminder                                Linear Regression 𝑦ො = 𝜃 + 𝑤 𝑇 𝑥

       ▪ Problem                                 Can only express linear relations

       ▪ Solution                                Stack several linear layers 𝜃 + 𝑤 𝑇 𝑥 and introduce non-linearity
                                                 via an activation function, e.g., 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑢 𝑥 = 𝑚𝑎𝑥(0, 𝑥)




                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 28


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Advanced Methods: Neural Network

           𝑙=1                            𝑙=2                           𝑙=3                    𝑙=4
                                                                                                                 Output of a neuron

                                                                                                                 𝑎𝑗𝑙 = 𝜎 ෍ 𝑤𝑗𝑘
                                                                                                                             𝑙
                                                                                                                               ⋅ 𝑎𝑘𝑙−1 + 𝜃𝑗𝑙
                                                                                                                           𝑘



                                                                                                                 Output of a layer

                                                                                                                 𝑎𝑙 = 𝜎(𝑤 𝑙 𝑎𝑙−1 + 𝜃 𝑙 )
                                                                                                𝑎23
                                                                                      Output of the 2nd neuron
                                                                                      in the 3rd layer



                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 29


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Advanced Methods: Neural Network – Tuning

                                     Increase nodes per layer
         Increase number of layers




                                                                                                                    Also consider varying:
                                                                                                                    • Learning rate / Learning rate
                                                                                                                       schedule
                                                                                                                    • Batch size
                                                                                                                    • Weight initialization
                                                                                                                    • Optimizer




                                                                                                                    Code available at:

                                                                                                                    https://github.com/flohilde/ifm_lecture



                                      Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 30


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Some Words of Advice
       ▪ Start with a simple model to setup a benchmark. Then try out more complex models and
         compare them to your benchmark.
         A possible progression: Linear regression → Gradient boosted decision tree → ANN
       ▪ When employing a complex method, train on a few thousand data points. It should be able
         to learn them by heart.
       ▪ Once you have a good model you can start fine-tuning. Only fine-tune hyperparameters
         that you actually understand and for which you can set reasonable ranges.
       ▪ Never resort to grid-search! Random-search and Bayesian optimization are much more
         sample efficient. Also, do use cross-validation.
       ▪ For neural networks: Architecture over hyperparameters!




                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 31


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
       Summary of lecture


       ▪ Simulation based methods (look-ahead, VFA) make use of descriptive analytics

       ▪ The size of the post-decision space of a problem can be lowered by dim. reduction

       ▪ Learn relation between features observed in the simulation and an expected future reward

       ▪ Generally, analytics provides generic approaches to design of ADP methods




                               Data Driven Decision Making | Lecture 9 – Analytics Issues in ADP | Page 32


© Prof. Dr. Dirk C. Mattfeld
